we're now to Israel's war against Hamas
in Gaza Tuesday was the deadliest day
for Israeli forces since the Hamas
Terror attacks on October 7th 24 Israeli
soldiers were killed in the Gaza Strip
as the military tried to encircle
Southern gaza's main city most of the
soldiers were killed in an explosion in
central Gaza according to Israeli
military officials two buildings they
had been mined for demolition collapsed
after Hamas militants fired at a nearby
tank
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu called it one of the most
difficult days for his country and he
added that Israel will not stop fighting
until absolute Victory is
achieved one of hamas's biggest
supporters is the regime in Iran which
has a goal of destroying Israel Iran's
influence reaches far beyond Hamas in
Gaza the clerical regime in tyon is
using a network of proxies stretching
from Israel's border with Lebanon to to
Iraq to Syria and along the Red Sea all
of these proxies are part of a strategy
against Israel and its main Ally the
United
States Israeli troops on the advance
footage from Israel's military shows its
forces fighting in the Gaza Strip prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu has
repeatedly framed this as a struggle
between Israel and Iran which backs
Hamas Israel has long been locked in a
sh war with Tran conducting covert
strikes and targeted killings it was
believed to have been behind this strike
in Damascus at the weekend but Netanyahu
says his country is now in direct
conflict with
Iran who says we're not attacking
Iran we are attacking it Iran is the
head of the octopus and you can see its
tentacles all
around Iran backs a network of militant
groups throughout the Middle East among
their goals to undermine israil and
drive out American influence these
proxies have become more active
following the October 7th Terror
attacks in Lebanon Tran supports and
arms Hezbollah seen by some countries as
a terrorist organization its Fighters
fire Rockets into Israel on an almost
daily basis Israel is returning fire
these images released by the Israeli
Army but while the situation here at the
border is tense so far it side has been
careful to avoid in
escalation Iran also arms the huis an
armed group in Yemen Civil War which is
seized control of large parts of the
country including the capital SAR now
the hoffies are attacking commercial
ships in the Red Sea they released this
video showing them boarding and seizing
a cargo vessel they say they are acting
in solidarity with the
Palestinians Yemen is Bravely standing
against Israel thank God for your
beautiful effort
Brave Mighty and proud Yemen is
defending the oppressed and strong
Palestinian
people the United States and others have
sent warships to the region and launch
strikes on houy
targets another front is in Iraq and
Syria where Iran appears to be
encouraging its militias to attack US
military bases Washington has responded
with its own
strikes Israel's president is calling
for a global response to these
challenges care there is an Empire of
evil emanating from tan they have
proxies all over the region quietly
lurking to undermine any peace process
and any stability of the world and that
is exactly what we are seeing and they
have to be faced by a very strong
Coalition for the moment Gaza is the
most active front in Israel's cold war
with
Iran but Iran's proxies are becoming
more heavily involved each strike and
Counter Strike could bring the sides
closer to open
conflict well I'm joined Now by Alex
vatanka director of the Iran program at
the Middle East Institute in Washington
DC Mr fanka it's good to have you with
us um this this growing involvement of
Iran's proxies what is driving all of it
is it all about the war in
Gaza uh you know I think in many ways we
really need to go back to the creation
of the Islamic Republic back in
1979 and when ayahi came to power um he
kind of created an agenda that this his
successor
Ayah who's been in power since ' 89 have
been pursuing which is basically the two
pillars of this Regional agenda is to
end the state of Israel as we know it
and to push the United States out of the
region and I think you know the Islamic
Republic has been pretty fiful in in
sticking to this agenda at a very high
cost for the Iranian nation and people
but that's where we are at now having
said that on the one hand while they do
want to push the United States out of
the region and confront Israel as we've
heard the Iranian supreme leader say
himself on many occasions since October
7th Iran is not in a business of
confronting the us or is Israel
militarily directly so what they're
doing instead is the sort of low
intensity Warfare through this network
of groups that they have created in the
last few decades but it's still not
without its risks because what Iran does
not know is the reaction from the West
ultimately could could uh be uh quite
costly for Iraq yeah I I've read that it
is the goal of the Islamic Republic um
of Iran to not to kill Israel not with
one blow but with 50 minor or small
stabbing wounds if you will and with
that in mind do you think then that Iran
has more plans and if yes what might
that look
like I think the Iranian game plan is
pretty obvious in the short term is to
bring about a ceasefire in Gaza as
quickly as possible both for
humanitarian reasons as they say but
also to salvage as much of the Hamas
military Wing as possible the Iranian
regime would like to see a military wing
of Hamas exist and continue to be a
point of concern for the Israelis going
forward in years to come so that's the
sort of game plan in the short term I
think in the long term two things that
Iran is banking on one is not to get
itself dragged into a regional War uh
certainly not one that involves the
United States because once the US enters
the war against Iran that really puts
the Islamic Republic at risk I mean the
future of the Islamic Republic is not a
certainty uh this is a regime that is
hugely unpopular with its own people
this is a regime that has pursuit of
foreign policy that's hugely unpopular
with the Iranian public so they would
take a big risk fighting the United
States and for that reason they don't
want to go there at the same time what
they're hoping to see is that what
Israel is doing in Gaza its conduct in
Gaza will undermine Israel's long-term
presence in the Middle East and for
example chip away at support in
countries that recently signed the
Abraham Accords the Saudis the UAE and
so forth so that I I think in in summary
is what the Iranians are playing on how
has Iran's Regional policy shifted since
the start of the war in
Gaza it really hasn't I mean the two P
big issues that I just mentioned in
terms of trying to save as much of Hamas
as possible keep hisbah out of the war
and also prevent a direct confrontation
United States those things have been
true since day one what we saw in the
last few weeks particularly with the
attack in the city of Kerman uh by Isis
horasan and the Iranian response to it
when they started firing ballistic
missiles into Syria Iraq but also
Pakistan it sort of created a new set of
questions into Iran and as somebody
who's an Iran Watcher I think they're
now wondering if what they have done
particularly Pakistan was the right
course of action you know to fire off
ballistic missiles at a country that is
three times the your population that has
nuclear
Arsenal it just suggested Reckless on
the part of the Iranian regime that
ought to concern all of us so one one
has to hope that messages are going to
Teran that look one thing is to have
proxies uh fire off uh you know small
Rockets into Northern Israel and get
away with it another thing is is to for
Iran to think that he can afford a
regional war against adversaries that
are much bigger than Iran has faced in
recent years you know on the outside
people looking in at the situation you
know would consider the Abraham Accords
will we seen several Muslim majority
countries manag to normalize relations
with Israel and then they they look at
the Islamic Republic of Iran and and ask
well why hasn't Iran managed to do this
I mean is it as simple as as a Shia
Sunni divide or is there more to
it look the the Iranian enity toward
Israel is limited to the Islamic
Republic's leadership the Iranian people
are not uh you know
anti-israeli uh and before 1979 Iran and
Israel had good relations as we all know
but as I said ay came in 1979 decided to
turn this into issue that his regime
would inves in has done at a very high
cost um aay who is the leader today at
age of 84 I doubt very much he's going
to change his position but I think
people that are sort of waiting on the
wings trying to maybe be the successors
to to this supreme leader they need to
really seriously do a bit of soul
searching is what Iran doing Vis A IR
Israel of of any serious benefit to the
Iranian National interest I think most
objective observers would say no it's an
ideological commitment by this regime
but if they chose a different course of
action Vis Israel that would really
benefit Iran because it will break its
isolation I'm wondering too how this
entire situation is affecting Iran
domestically I'm thinking about the
recent huge protest against the
government there's the faltering economy
and there's the 45th anniversary of the
Islamic rep repu which is coming up
soon right look I mean this goes back to
what I said before about the the region
a regional War being something that's
too much of a risk for Ayatollah K and
the generals in the Revolutionary guards
precisely for for the fact that you just
mentioned public sentiment inside of
Iran this is a very angry Iranian public
this is a public that looks around and
inside of the Border sees incompetence
mismanagement corruption on scales never
seen before and in terms of foreign
policy a regime that is basically taking
risks everywhere you look while not
being able to protect Iranian citizens
against basic threats such as Isis from
corasan as we just saw in with the
attack in keron so it's a it's a regime
that if really its uh Regional policy
was put put to vote inside of Iran I
have no doubt it would not be able to to
win but one point final point if I make
quickly on what we heard from we got 30
seconds go ahead seconds look the issue
also is this Iran benefits from other
peoples in the region particularly in
this case Israel making mistakes if
there was a real serious attempt to
two-state solution uh in uh by the
Palestinians and the Israelis that
Iranian militant message would be so
harder for Teran to sell so that's
important for us to Alex vatanka
director of the Iran program at the
Middle East Institute Mr vatanka we
appreciate your time and your analysis
tonight thank
you